{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2869
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red109\green109\blue109;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c50196\c50196\c50196;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Developer - Architect Intrasation Pt. 1\
\
We usually give architects credit for the built environment. If a building ages well or a neighborhood works, we praise the architect. If something goes wrong, we blame the architect too.\
That\'92s fair, for the most part. But it\'92s only part of the story.\
Behind every important building that actually gets built, there\'92s someone who makes it happen. Someone sees a vision\'97maybe it\'92s unusual or costly\'97and decides it could work, then figures out how. That person is the developer. We rarely talk about them, and when we do, it\'92s usually as the villain.\
I studied architecture at ETH and now I\'92m doing my MSRED at Columbia. Some people were confused by this change. Why leave design for finance? But finance isn\'92t the opposite of design\'97it\'92s what decides if a design can exist at all.\
To be honest, I got frustrated. Not with architecture itself\'97I still think in terms of space and care about how a room feels or how a facade meets the street. I was frustrated by how powerless architecture can be. You can design the best building in the world, but if no one finances, engineers, permits, builds, or leases it, it stays on paper. It\'92s just a rendering, a competition entry, or an Instagram post.\
The developer is the one who handles all of that. The quality of the developer shapes the quality of what gets built. This seems obvious, but it still needs to be said because people rarely talk about the built environment this way.\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf3 \strokec3 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \strokec2 Some people argue that developers are the problem. They say construction is driven by money, and buildings are made to store wealth instead of housing people. Architects are seen as complicit because they give credibility to speculation. The suggested solution is to stop building.\
I get this argument, and some of it is true. In some European countries, there are more empty homes than the number of homes needed, which makes you wonder what we\'92re really doing. In Manhattan, you can see residential towers where half the units have never been lived in and ask who those buildings are for.\
But this argument treats all developers as the same. It\'92s as if the person who built Ordos, a Chinese ghost city for a million people that no one moved to, and the person who spent twenty years creating a pedestrian street in Cambridge, Massachusetts, are the same. They\'92re not. The first is a speculator. The second saw that a walkway between two streets would make his building more accessible and improve the neighborhood. That\'92s a design decision, even though it was made by a developer.\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf3 \strokec3 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \strokec2 There\'92s a line from a real estate textbook that I keep thinking about. The author says the developer most likely to succeed in the design phase is someone who can think \'93qualitatively, quantitatively, nonlinearly, and visually, all at the same time.\'94 When I read that, I thought: he\'92s describing an architect, even if he doesn\'92t realize it.\
That\'92s the gap. Finance people describe the ideal developer in ways that sound like an architect\'92s education. Architects describe the ideal architect as someone untouched by money. Neither side sees what\'92s clear from the middle: these are the same skills, or at least they should be.\
I have an architecture background, but most of my classmates at Columbia don\'92t. What we all learn, though, is how to balance two things at once: a site plan and a pro forma, a floor plate and a lease structure, a vision for a place and a spreadsheet that shows if it\'92s possible. You don\'92t resolve the tension between these things\'97you manage it, in every project and every decision.\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf3 \strokec3 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \strokec2 The criticism from architects\'97that developers ruin everything\'97is really about bad developers. These are the ones who use architects just for show, treat design as something to cut when budgets are tight, and see buildings only as financial tools with walls.\
But some developers see design as what makes the financial side work. Good design is good business\'97not just as a slogan, but as a real way value is created in real estate. A building that works for its tenants leases faster. One that fits its context keeps its value longer. If nobody wants to tear down a building in thirty years, it was probably designed by someone who cared.\
The real question is who becomes the developer. If it\'92s someone without any sense of space or how buildings affect people\'92s lives, you end up with ghost cities, empty towers, and superficial architecture. If it\'92s someone trained as an architect who then learned finance, you get something different. It\'92s not always better, but there\'92s a chance for something better that wouldn\'92t exist otherwise.\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf3 \strokec3 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \strokec2 I don\'92t have a tidy conclusion. The built environment won\'92t improve just because architects complain about developers or because developers ignore architects. It might get better if more people who think like architects start making the decisions that architects usually don\'92t get to make.\
We have leverage that most designers don\'92t. The developer controls the program, the budget, the site, and the schedule. That\'92s where the built environment really takes shape\'97not at the drawing board, but at the negotiating table, the zoning hearing, and the capital stack meeting.\
}